# New in Nutils 5 "farfalle"

- [Nutils 5.2](https://github.com/evalf/nutils/releases/tag/v5.2) was released on June 11th, 2019
- [Nutils 5.1](https://github.com/evalf/nutils/releases/tag/v5.1) was released on September 3rd, 2019
- [Nutils 5.0](https://github.com/evalf/nutils/releases/tag/v5.0) was released on April 3rd, 2020

## Matrix matmul operator, solve with multiple right hand sides

The `Matrix.matvec` method has been deprecated in favour of the new
`__matmul__` (@) operator, which supports multiplication arrays of any
dimension. The `nutils.matrix.Matrix.solve` method has been extended to support
multiple right hand sides::

```python
matrix.matvec(lhs) # deprecated
matrix @ lhs # new syntax
matrix @ numpy.stack([lhs1, lhs2, lhs3], axis=1)
matrix.solve(rhs)
matrix.solve(numpy.stack([rhs1, rhs2, rhs3], axis=1)
```

## MKL's fgmres method

Matrices produced by the `MKL` backend now support the
`nutils.matrix.Matrix.solve` argument solver='fmgres' to use Intel MKL's fgmres
method.

## Thetamethod time target

The `nutils.solver.thetamethod` class, as well as its special cases
`impliciteuler` and `cranknicolson`, now have a `timetarget` argument to
specify that the formulation contains a time variable::

```python
res = topo.integral('...?t... d:x' @ ns, degree=2)
solver.impliciteuler('dofs', res, ..., timetarget='t')
```

## New leveltopo argument for trimming

In `nutils.topology.Topology.trim`, in case the levelset cannot be evaluated on
the to-be-trimmed topology itself, the correct topology can now be specified
via the new `leveltopo` argument.

## New unittest assertion assertAlmostEqual64

`nutils.testing.TestCase` now facilitates comparison against base64 encoded,
compressed, and packed data via the new method
`nutils.testing.TestCase.assertAlmostEqual64`. This replaces
`numeric.assert_allclose64` which is now deprecated and scheduled for removal
in Nutils 6.

## Fast locate for structured topology, geometry

A special case `nutils.topology.Topology.locate` method for structured
topologies checks of the geometry is an affine transformation of the natural
configuration, in which case the trivial inversion is used instead of expensive
Newton iterations::

```python
topo, geom = mesh.rectilinear([2, 3])
smp = topo.locate(geom/2-1, [[-.1,.2]])
# locate detected linear geometry: x = [-1. -1.] + [0.5 0.5] xi ~+2.2e-16
```

## Lazy references, transforms, bases

The introduction of sequence abstractions `nutils.elementseq` and
`nutils.transformseq`, together with and a lazy implementation of
`nutils.function.Basis` basis functions, help to prevent the unnecessary
generation of data. In hierarchically refined topologies, in particular, this
results in large speedups and a much reduced memory footprint.

## Switch to treelog

The `nutils.log` module is deprecated and will be replaced by the externally
maintained `treelog <https://github.com/evalf/treelog>`_, which is now an
installation dependency.

## Replace pariter, parmap by fork, range.

The `nutils.parallel` module is largely rewritten. The old methods `pariter`
and `parmap` are replaced by the `nutils.parallel.fork` context, combined with
the shared `nutils.parallel.range` iterator::

```python
indices = parallel.range(10)
with parallel.fork(nprocs=2) as procid:
  for index in indices:
    print('procid={}, index={}'.format(procid, index))
```
